cdi.md, before:

---
label: 'Crescent Difficulty Index'
order: 1
icon: moon
---
!!!warning
This page has **incomplete information**. Not all information present may be up-to-date.

*Last update: 09 January 2025*
!!!
!!!
The information on this page is largely based on opinion. It may not fully reflect each individual's opinions and is just a genearlization.
!!!
The **Crescent Difficulty Index** (CDI) is an informal unit of measuring a course's difficulty based on 3 factors:
### Load
> This factor is influenced by how often and clustered coursework such as quizzes, labs, assignments, and projects are as well as how long it averagely takes to complete them. For group projects, it is also determined by how often each group member needs to spend on it per week.
### Complexity
> This factor is influenced by how difficult the material in a course is relative to a student without prior experience in the field, as well as how difficult the topic is in general.
### Strain
> This factor is mostly based on the public opinion of the instructor, the quality of the lectures/labs relative to how much you need to study it outside of them, and the clarity of instructions as a whole. This factor has the least weight due to its high variability.
## Ratings
After considering all these factors, the ratings are then given based on how much the factors are present.
=== :star:

===

=== :star::star:
===

=== :star::star::star: 
===

=== :star::star::star::star: 
===

=== :star::star::star::star::star:
===

Commit message:

Add icons and placeholder index.md for each term 2 course

cdi.md, after:

---
label: 'Crescent Difficulty Index'
order: 1
icon: moon
---
!!!
The information on this page is largely based on opinion. It may not fully reflect each individual's opinions and is just a genearlization.
!!!
The **Crescent Difficulty Index** (CDI) is an informal unit of measuring a course's difficulty based on 3 factors.
## Factors
### Load (55%)
> This factor is influenced by how often and clustered coursework such as quizzes, labs, assignments, and projects are as well as how long it averagely takes to complete them. For group projects, it is also determined by how often each group member needs to spend on it per week. It is the highest weighted factor of the three.
### Complexity (30%)
> This factor is influenced by how difficult the material in a course is relative to a student without prior experience in the field, as well as how difficult the topic is in general.
### Strain (15%)
> This factor is mostly based on the public opinion of the instructor, the quality of the lectures/labs relative to how much you need to study it outside of them, and the clarity of instructions as a whole. The length of a lecture also affects Strain for lectures that go over 1h50m. This factor has the least weight due to its high variability.
## Grades
After considering all these factors, grades are then given based on how much the factors are present.
==- :crescent_moon:
[!badge variant="info" text="1.0-1.9"] CDI

**Least Concern**.<br>
Courses in this CDI category are usually pass or fail courses, or courses that are incredibly easy.
==- :crescent_moon::crescent_moon:
[!badge variant="primary" text="2.0-2.7"] CDI

**Safe**<br>
Courses in this CDI category are usually relatively easy classes and/or have amazing professors.
==- :crescent_moon::crescent_moon::crescent_moon:
[!badge variant="success" text="2.8-3.4"] CDI

**Normal**<br>
Courses in this CDI category are of average difficulty, having moderate workload and study requirements.
==- :crescent_moon::crescent_moon::crescent_moon::crescent_moon: 
[!badge variant="warning" text="3.5-4.2"] CDI

**Tough**<br>
Courses in this CDI category have higher than average difficulty, either having more complex topics or heavier workload than the previous ones.
==- :crescent_moon::crescent_moon::crescent_moon::crescent_moon::crescent_moon:
[!badge variant="danger" text="4.3-5.0"] CDI

**High Priority**<br>
Courses in this CDI category are infamously hard classes relative to the term, being deeply complex in nature, requiring large amounts of time dedicated to it, or both. A rough professor usually doesn't propel a course into this category, but it can be a pivoting factor. 
===
